Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
When you go to the website for the Department of Veterans Affairs, you will find a list of some 368 frequently asked questions just concerning veterans' benefits.
And that doesn't include the questions that are not frequently asked.
One question some local veterans might have is, where can I go to find out about benefits or just to get primary health care?
Well, that's simple, and College Station on Rock Prairie Road, right across the street from the College Station Medical Center, is a community-based outpatient clinic.
Rene Ramirez, a Marine, is a veteran counselor there, and he himself, a veteran who has served practically all over the world, including Somalia, Bosnia, Iraq, Afghanistan.
But today, his passion is to help other veterans find out answers.
about the benefits that they're entitled to but may not know that they are.
So please welcome Rene Ramirez to Veterans of the Valley.
First off, I want to make it clear, you don't work for the Veterans Administration, you work for the Texas Veterans Commission.
Yes, sir.
That's right.
Talk a little bit first off about your own service.
We touched on that.
I certainly don't want to let the show go by without you talking about your 26 years in the Marine Corps.
And you just started listing places that you'd been from the East Coast, Norway, Africa, Israel, Greece, Italy, Philippines, Thailand, Australia, Japanese islands.
And then as we mentioned, Somalia and Bosnia and Iraq and Afghanistan.
Talk a little bit about what your service is and what you did.
Well, I started off after high school, because I didn't know what I really wanted to do.
And being a Marine sounded like a good deal.
So I did that, and it kind of flourished from there.
My first overseas tour was in Norway, where I got to live in an igloo, which was great.
I learned what a kosher really was then.
It was great for a while, I bet.
I was a radio operator.
you know, worked on communications equipment at the time.
I was with a tank or AAV battalion where we worked on Amtraks on the different communications assets inside of it.
Right.
Like I said, I joined out of high school in 1982.
I went into the reserves because I wasn't quite sure, you know, Marines, you know.
So after about a year and a half of that, I decided, wow, this is pretty good.
There's got to be, you know, there's got to be
more out there.
And that's what I did.
I went active duty.
Did like, you know, packed up my family and took off and went and wanted to go to the station at Camp Lejeune.
Right.
Where I spent, well, I say I spent 10 years there, but it was actually my family spent 10 years there.
As you noted, I got to travel around a little bit.
Exactly.
A whole lot.
See the world.
But it was exciting.
It was a great 26 years.
But you can't stay there forever.
No.
Communications, though, was what you did.
Somalia, Bosnia, Iraq, Afghanistan.
I think you told me in Afghanistan it involved air defense.
And so just talk a little bit about that.
You were in communications.
Yes.
For Somalia and Bosnia, I was on the USS Guam.
I was in charge of the watches of the Landing Force Operations Center.
It was exciting.
We got to hear what's going on everywhere at all times.
The only thing that wasn't too fun was
When troops landed, I had to stay on the ship and see everybody else or hear everybody go ashore.
So that was interesting.
But that's basically what I did for Bosnia and Somalia.
For...
Afghanistan, like you mentioned, my unit provided the network pipeline for the air defense systems.
We made sure that they stayed up.
We also provided the emails and internet access and all that.
and nice little stuff there and also control the firewalls and make sure we stayed within standards so we couldn't be hacked and stuff like that.
Right.
Well, thank you for your service.
You came to College Station in June of 2007.
Let's talk about why you're here today and to talk about the outpatient clinic in College Station, which is on Rock Prairie Road.
Not only for the people who don't know that it's there, but the people who know that it's there, but doesn't know exactly the services that it provides.
We'll get specific in a minute, but just generally talk about the outpatient clinic and the general services that it provides, that you provide, that it provides as a primary health facility.
Sort of talk about the clinic.
As you mentioned, it is a primary health care clinic.
Veterans come there to be seen for any normal routine clinical or medical issues that they may have.
And if any kind of specialty care is needed,
The primary caregiver that they are assigned there will give them a consult to go see the doctor in like Temple and stuff like that.
They also provide the flu shot annually for flu season.
That's where veterans can go to get their H1N1 also as well as the regular flu season stuff.
So simple health care is what we're talking about.
They'll draw blood there for tests and things like that.
Simple health care.
If it's determined that they need to see a specialist that may be in Temple, that's when they're referred to Temple.
Yes, sir.
If they're in the Temple regional area, we do have people that, because Brazos Valley or Brazos County is the borderline between the Houston and Temple area, if they're, say, for instance, in Navasota, they will be referred to Houston to go and get their care there.
Right.
That's the Michael DeBakey VA Medical Center there in Houston.
Matter of fact, there are, for people who don't know, five VA medical centers in Texas in Bonham, Houston, Kerrville, Temple,
and in Waco.
And so those are the five there.
From your desk specifically, you're a counselor.
People come in and they say, I'm a veteran, I served, here's my papers,
what benefits do I have?
Especially in this day and age when the economy is much tighter on people.
People are losing jobs, people are needing the money that they're entitled to, but there's an awful lot of people out there that don't know what they're entitled to, right?
That's where you come in.
Yes, sir.
I thought it was quite surprising that there are a lot of veterans that go back as far as World War II that didn't know that they rate certain benefit.
What I do mainly is compensation and pension.
Compensation is for injuries or illnesses incurred while in service.
A pension is for low-income wartime veterans or age 65, because the VA considers a veteran who is 65 or older
basically 100% disabled, therefore they provide a pension for them.
And again, the pension portion is based on income.
So if a veteran banks above what the Congress has set as an income, then of course that pension can't be given to them.
Whereas a compensation
It doesn't matter what your income is, you will get that.
And it's not only about money when it comes to compensation.
Compensation is the key to getting into the VA system and getting the care that you deserve as a veteran because of the injuries incurred while in service.
For instance, if a veteran
was injured, broke a leg or something like that while in service, and now it's starting to bother him.
If he's service-connected for it, he can come right to the clinic and get treated for it.
If a new surgery is required, he can get the surgery right, well, not right there at College Station, but he can be referred over to Temple or Houston to get the care he needs, or her needs.
Exactly, exactly.
And we talked about the primary care, and
They'll make the evaluation to see if a specialty care is needed.
And that's when they would go to one of the VA hospitals.
One thing that you wanted to make sure that people realize is they do not necessarily have needed to serve in a combat zone, in combat, to benefit this.
You talked about one veteran that came that actually, during the Vietnam War, did his service in El Paso.
Right, right.
And he had injuries from playing football.
Yes.
I don't remember if it was actually football or baseball, but I thought it was football, but I think it was more like baseball.
But either way, it doesn't matter.
It was a sport that he played.
He played for the Air Force and he traveled around and he played the sport and he had several injuries.
And he was told that because he did not go overseas, that he did not rate benefits, which is not true.
Mm hmm.
He did not rate any combat type benefits, but he did rate the fact that he was in during wartime because everybody does their part, whether you're serving in the rear in the States
or serving overseas, somebody has to be where you're at.
Even if you didn't serve in the actual combat zone, somebody has to be there.
So you rate almost everything they do, except for actual combat type awards and stuff like that.
And they can also be provided with the benefits that are needed.
In his case, he had a bunch of injuries that now because he's in his 60s, he had difficulty walking.
because the injuries that he sustained while playing the sports and stuff like that.
And I told him that, yes, you do rate it.
The first thing we had to do is get him into the clinic where they have the 1010EZ form.
I had to get him in to get a primary caregiver.
But I submitted the paperwork.
We worked and got the times and dates that he was seeing because if an injury happened in a federal installation,
or near a federal installation and they were seen at a federal installation, then the VA can easily go there and pull the record.
So it's real easy to just get the information for that.
And we put in a claim for them for all that stuff.
Right.
And I think it's important that people realize we're talking about, let's say, people my age who serve, who I did not serve in Vietnam, but people my age who did serve in Vietnam.
You know, they're getting into their 60s, into their early 70s now.
And they did serve during that time.
They're getting the normal aches and pains of any 60 and 70-year-old person they're going to get.
Yes, they are.
Whether these aches and pains are a result of either their combat in Vietnam, that really doesn't matter.
They can come to the VA clinic and get treated like that.
And not only that, but a very important thing to talk about is about medications, because they're getting more and more expensive, and the copay is a lot less expensive, right, if they're insured.
The copay for the VA is less expensive.
They give you 30 days of prescriptions, and I can't quote exactly the price.
I know I used to be like...
$8, but it may have gone up a little bit, but still a lot of it is cheaper than it is out in town.
Oh yeah, because normally you're talking about insurance policies now where they're anywhere from $25, $35, $45 if they're named drugs and things like that, if they're not generic drugs.
right the the i guess the key the key thing to uh to remember about the va is that the va is not a a health insurance company it is a health care provider right so uh if if uh to to qualify uh for for anything other than combat related uh uh
care it all is based on your income they have eight different levels of qualifications to come to the VA clinic of course it's it's for veterans who haven't who have
income where they just, you know, live off of Social Security or and in their Social Security isn't enough, then they'll qualify for possibly full care.
Right.
And then another another caveat to the to the service connected.
If a veteran is 50% or greater on his service connected disabilities, he's got free health care from from now on.
I see.
Because, I mean, if he's 50% disabled, then he the VA is going to take care of him.
Right.
For everything.
Renee, you touched on this a moment ago.
You said you were talking about the monetary side and the care side.
Right.
There might be some veterans that come to you that after they got out of the service, they went on and made themselves a nice living and got themselves a nest egg.
And they might come to you and say, hey, I don't need the money.
But that's not really the point.
The point is that they need to come see you to get the paperwork to get the health care.
Right, for the health care.
And being a veteran myself of Iraq and Afghanistan, I kind of felt this when I first got out.
I didn't need the VA.
I'm fine.
Of course, once I did the physical, they found out I wasn't as fine as I thought I was.
But anyway, I have veterans who were in combat areas that feel that they don't need it.
that it's for people who are seriously hurt, and that's not the case.
It is good to go ahead and get into the VA system, because I do have veterans who, like you mentioned, they made a great living,
and they were mainly, well, I don't wanna put down any particular industry, but they were doing very well, and then something as little as a stroke comes along, and they can no longer do that job anymore.
If they were in the VA system and were taken to a hospital,
and mentioned, anyone mentioned that they were a veteran, then chances are the VA will pick up the tab depending on whether or not that veteran can afford to pay for it or not.
And if a veteran
is making good money and lives great, and then all of a sudden he's not making anything.
The VA is there, I guess, kind of like to catch veterans and help them out when they really, really need it.
Now, the important word is there when they really, really need it.
Right, right.
You and I were talking earlier about a situation that was close to me that we'll just use as an example, say, a veteran, a World War II veteran who now finds himself, say, in assisted living or in a nursing home.
not at a VA hospital, but in a private nursing home of some sort.
As long as if they served in wartime and can produce their honorable discharge and all the proper paperwork and all of that, they have benefits coming according to their income.
And a lot of time their income might only be Social Security, maybe a few little investments on the side or something like that.
But according to their income, they have benefits coming that they might not even know about that they just need to apply for.
Yes, they do.
They have a regular pension I mentioned, but then the pension also, there's a special monthly pension.
Special monthly, yeah, pension, that's what it's called, I'm sorry.
And it's for situations such as that, where a veteran finds themselves where they were living at home, they were fine and everything like that, and they were living great, and now they find themselves
needing to go into a nursing home or assisted living, then they can apply for a special monthly pension, which will help pay for that aid and attendance, which aid and attendance doesn't necessarily mean that you have to go to an assisted living.
For instance, if you have a parent coming to live with you and that parent
well, a parent of a spouse of a veteran, let's put it that way.
It's got to be delivered with you.
And the veteran or the spouse requires some kind of extra care that they can't really take care of themselves fully.
Then they can put in for aid and attendance to where they'll get an extra
a little extra money in their pension to alleviate or to either hire somebody to come in and assist them or to give a veteran's family members a little extra money for the assistance.
Basically because somebody's caring for that individual.
Right.
What it comes down to.
And if that veteran, in the case that we were talking about with a personal situation with
relative of mine if that veteran passes away and they have a surviving spouse.
In this case, we were talking about a surviving widow.
It's just another case of filing other paperwork for that widow to get benefits.
Right, right.
There's a different, there's a form 534.
It's a widow's pension.
Also, one of the things that we need to, that's important for veterans to do, and veterans need to do this because they need to do it for their families.
And that is, if they're,
Because there's what they call presumptive disabilities that you can get for being in certain areas of combat.
For instance,
There's Vietnam, the Agent Orange issue.
Everybody's heard about that.
They just added three more disabilities to that, if you keep track of that.
One of those is diabetes, I know, right?
Well, diabetes has been on there since, I believe, like 1995 or something like that.
Exactly.
One of them is, oh, I can't remember exactly the name of it, but it has to do with something with the heart condition and also, well, anyway, it's other disabilities.
They can actually go to VA.gov and see what they are.
Right.
And if they are covered...
or they have these disabilities and they have them recorded, they're service-connected for it, and they happen to, like you mentioned, pass, then the spouse is actually covered because then she'll get, because there's, for spouses, there's DIC,
And then there's also a widow's pension.
A widow's pension, just like compensation pension for a veteran, a widow's pension is based on the income, whereas a DIC is based on the veteran dying from something that was service-connected.
For instance, like I mentioned earlier, Agent Orange.
Agent Orange causes diabetes.
They have diabetes causes diabetes.
heart conditions, a veteran dies of a heart attack because of, and it states that the doctor feels that the reason why he died from this heart attack was because of the diabetes, made it worse.
then that spouse is covered with DIC and gets a lot more benefits than if she were just receiving a widow's pension.
Because as I understand it, correct me if I'm wrong, if you had boots on the ground in Vietnam, you are considered to have been affected by Agent Arch.
One day, it doesn't matter.
I have a veteran that flew in for one day and they said, you don't have enough time in service to stay here, you gotta go home.
So he had to turn around and leave.
He was there for one day because he left the next morning.
He was there for one day and he left, so therefore he qualifies.
Now that also, they have what they call blue and brown water navy.
Brown water navy is like John Kerry.
He drove his gunboat in and out of the waterways there, so he is considered in the brown water navy.
If a small craft from a larger ship came over
dropped this gate and people got out and let's say, you know, went and bought a Mai Tai or something and got back on the ship.
Well, then they're considered being there also, even though they spent 99% of their time on the ship itself.
If they docked and went a chore, then they qualify for it also.
Right.
Folks, this is a taxpayer money that we're talking about.
you know, I don't want to get political here, but it doesn't need to stay in the government coffers.
It needs to go to the people who deserve it.
And those are the veterans who have defended our country.
I want to touch on, we've got about six or seven minutes left.
And we talked about this the other day when we were visiting.
PTSD is certainly an issue, post-traumatic stress disorder that has come out of, I guess, every war, Vietnam, and certainly Iraq, Afghanistan,
And it's a situation that a lot of veterans don't like to talk about because there's an implication there that there's a weakness there.
I had a veteran on just a few weeks ago who had been diagnosed with PTSD.
And his message to our viewers was, don't be a hero if you think you're suffering from it.
go get help.
And you want to say the same thing.
They're already heroes.
They don't have to be a hero because they're already heroes.
They've done something that very few people want to do.
They did it.
They volunteered.
for the new service now.
They volunteered to go in there.
For those people who were drafted, well then of course, I didn't want to be here.
It gets pretty rough that way too.
But if you feel, if a veteran feels that they're suffering from PTSD, and they can go to va.gov and see what the difference
symptoms are.
They can go to the VA clinic and request to see a social worker.
And a social worker, you just go in there, and her name is Teresa Cannon.
She works over there at the clinic.
Me and her kind of work close together because if she finds that maybe this person needs to put in for it, she'll send them over to me.
And if I get a veteran in there who
And I have gotten them in there that don't realize they have it and I see it and I tell them if they wish to go over there, they can.
If not, because you can't force somebody to do that.
They can go over there and they can discuss it with her and then see and get them started getting treatment for that.
But anyway, they can go over to the VA clinic and request to see the social worker or request to see a psychologist, which if they ask for that, they'll wind up seeing Teresa either way.
And let's say, for instance, they're already in the VA system and they add an appointment.
They can actually let their primary caregiver there know that, you know, I feel, you know, whatever.
And then they will recommend they see a psychologist, psychiatrist either also.
And one reason this is important, and I'm sorry, I don't mean to interrupt, I want you to go on with that thought, is that PTSD, while it's a psychological disorder, it can also lead to physical disabilities, many physical disabilities, and indeed it does.
It could.
It could lead to, well, in some cases,
Any kind of real stress on your body can lead to physical manifestation.
I'm not a doctor, so I can't really diagnose or say exactly what it would cause.
Well, I don't think there's a doctor anywhere that would deny that.
It causes some, like one of the things that I've seen was that it's been put in there, that hypertension.
Right.
But it's not guaranteed that that's the cause of it.
What I wanted to say about PTSD is that there is more than one way to suffer from PTSD.
It is not necessarily a combat related issue.
There's there.
If you were in service and the
saw an accident while you were in service, a jeep, well they don't have jeeps no more, Humvee flips over and something happens or a mechanized vehicle falls off a cliff which is an exact, I do have a claim like that and it's not really something I want to describe but this guy saw that, went down to assist and he suffers from PTSD because of that night.
So it's not, and then there's also other traumas such as
Sexual trauma.
If something happened to somebody while they were in the service, then they can actually bring that up as part of PTSD also.
Right, so there's a wide range there of that.
You talked about one individual that came to you and said that they believed that they would not be
alive, had it not been for a group session that's offered by your local, Teresa offers with a local clinic.
Teresa Cannon, yes.
This is a Vietnam veteran, and an incident happened that caused him to suffer.
And there was, he feels that his actions or reactions weren't good enough, and he suffers from PTSD as well as depression.
He told me, Sarge, if it wasn't for that group, I wouldn't be here right now.
Right.
Because those guys...
know where I'm coming from, and they've been there too, and I can relate with those.
And I can honestly say that's probably one of the reasons why I have this job is because I can talk to people who I can relate with.
Right.
So it certainly is something that people don't need to ignore and people need to understand, and the Texas Veterans Commission and the clinic right here on Rock Prairie Road is available to help.
I was looking at some numbers that were really incredible.
This is from the Veterans Administration website.
There are some 25 million veterans living in the US today.
But that number pales in comparison to the some 70 million that are potentially eligible for VA benefits when you include veterans, family members, and survivors.
And an awful lot of those don't know about what they're entitled to.
I did want to mention that we do have one more counselor.
He works for the county, the Brazos County.
Each county has a veteran service officer.
We do have a counselor there in downtown by the name of Johnny Yepes.
He's there only three days a week, Vietnam veteran, and he's there to serve too if they can't make it up to Rock Prairie.
At least they can go down to the county office there and request to see a
veteran service officer there right right before we leave we got a couple of minutes left I want to make sure that people know the the address and the telephone number I don't know whether we can put it up on the screen or not but again it's a 1651 Rock Prairie and it's right across the street from the College Station Medical Center right there on the first floor suite 100 right across the street from the Medical Center and the phone number it's in the book 680-0361 and
There's so much more that we could talk about about the service that it provides.
But I think that we've told people who don't know that it exists that it does.
People who do know that it exists a little bit about what you do.
And I want to thank you for what you do because you provide a service just as important now as you did when your boots were on the ground when you were serving as a United States Marine.
Thank you.
Indeed.
Thank you, Rene.
Thank you for your service and thank you for being with us.
Yes, sir.
Thank you.
So there you have an overview of what is available to veterans right here in the Brazos Valley.
Many veterans are taking advantage of the benefits that they have rightly earned, but there are certainly many others out there who have learned something today that they did not know before.
We thank Rene Ramirez, not only for his service to his country, but to his daily service to fellow veterans at the local VA clinic on Rock Prairie Road in College Station.
Join us next week.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
This is Veterans of the Valley.